added basic_wake_tutorial.md (#575)
sifive/wake: share/doc/wake/basic_wake_tutorial.md

## Wake Tutorial

### Invoking wake

1. Create a wake database: `wake --init .`

> 2. Run command for wake: `wake -vx '<function_name> <parameter_if_any>'`

Reviewer: is there a `wake --help` to see all the options? What does -vx mean?

Author: I will add this info in the next commit

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### wake `Hello World`
```

Author: What is this changer for?

> * If you want to display a string you can that using the below function by writing the string to be displayed inisde "" and call the function abc . Ex: wake -x 'abc'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you want to display a string you can do that using the below function by writing the string to be displayed inside "" and call the function abc . Ex: wake -x 'abc'
```

Author: Done

> ```

Reviewer: This example is not tutorial-y enough. Are you saying "Create a file called abc.wake and hten put this stuff in it", then call "wake -x abc" or? What is the relationship between the `wake -x 'abc'` and the text shown here?

Author: No. abc is a function name. You can add all the functions in any file with `.wake` extension and execute it by calling `wake -x '<function name>'`

Reviewer 2: I was lost here... and then eventually,  I figured out some way to do it. 
What I did was:
1. go to federation/scripts
2. put def abc definition in <any name>.wake in the directory
3. do ./runWake -x 'abc' and this will set up WAKE_ENV and load-wake and then call abc function defined in <any name>.wake

It would be good for beginners that these steps are written step by step and not force them to figure things out.

Author: Filename is not important. Whenever you call a function it will look for that  function in the wake file. 
If in case of multiple `.wake` files, wake is intelligent enough to parse through all `.wake` files and get the function and execute it.

def abc = "Hello World"
```

* The other way to do this is `wake -x '"Hello World"'`

### Defining Functions

> A function may be defines using the keyword def. Simple function definition takes the form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A function may be defined using the keyword def. Simple function definition takes the form
```

Author: Done

> `def <fun name> <parameter> = <expression>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`def <function name> <parameter list> = <expression>`
```

Can I specify a return value? how is that done

Reviewer: can i specify types for the parameters?

Author: We cannot specify explicitly the return type and type of parameters. Usually return value is specified by the last line in the given function.

* Below function  double takes an argment x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 2
```
def double x = 2*x
```

* Below function triple takes an argument x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 3
```
def triple x = 3*x
```

* Function inc increments the values by 1 and returns the value
```
def inc x = x+1
```

> * Function adda takes an argument of type string and concantenates it with b and gives the output

Reviewer: how is it indicated that the argument is of type string?

Author: The operator used here is a string interpolation operator `{ }`

> * Function adda takes an argument of type string and concantenates it with b and gives the output

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Function adda takes an argument of type string and concatenates it with b and gives the output
```

Author: Done

```
def adda s = "{s}b"
```

* Function times4 takes an argument x and applies the function double twice on x
```
def times4 x = double (double x)
```

> * Function aveI takes 2 arguments x and y and adds two values and divide the result by 2. This function shows the other was of defining the parameters using lambda operator

Reviewer: what is the lambda operator? This is the first time you mentioned it. How is this example showing it at all?

Reviewer: what is the name `aveI` supposed to convey? This is taking an average, what is I?

Author: You can use lambda operator to create the parameters by defining then in the function body. so `def function a b = a+b` 
is same as `def function = \a \b (a+b)`

aveI conveys averageofInteger numbers

```
def aveI = \x\y (x+y)/2
```

> * Function aveR takes 2 arguments of type double and divides the result by 2

Reviewer: this is all in the function section. Yet it doesn't seem like you're showing us much about functions and interesting concepts related to the keyword `def`. YOu're showing us lots of stuff related to operators. Shouldn't this go into an operators section?

Author: I have defined the operators separately

```
def aveR = \x\y (x +. y) /. 2.0
```

* Function aveR adds 2 values and provides the remainder 
```
def aveM = \x\y (x+y) % 2
```

* Function duplicate concantenates or copies a given string twice
```
def duplicate s  ="{s}{s}"
```

> * integerToUnicode function takes the ASCII input and provides its equivalent character

Reviewer: is this a wake builtin?

Author: Yes it is

```
wake -x 'integerToUnicode 99'
```

* unicodeToInteger function gives the ASCII value of the given character
```
wake -x 'unicodeToInteger "a"'
```

* strlen function returns the length of the given string
```
wake -x 'strlen "abcde"'
```

* Below function takes a string and returns the middle character of the string
```
def middle fullstring =

>   def len = if (strlen fullstring % 2 == 0) then (strlen fullstring / 2) else  ((strlen fullstring / 2) + 1)

Reviewer: now we are showing `if`, `then`, `explode`, `take`, `reverse`, `head`... none of which you have explained. None of this is making logical sense under "Defining Functions" heading.

Author: I will explain the built-in functions in the next commit. This is more of playing around the strings and extracting different outputs from them

  def len = strlen fullstring
  def outputstr = explode fullstring | take (len-1) | tail | cat
  outputstr
```

* Function incfirst takes a string and a character string and replaces the first character of the string with the given character string
```
def incfirst fullstring chrstr = explode fullstring | tail | prepend chrstr | cat
```

* Function reorder takes a string , split the string and then reverses the splitted string and then concantenates both (Ex: hangover -> overhang)
```
def reorder fullstring = 
  def Pair firststr laststr = 
    explode fullstring
    | splitAt (strlen fullstring / 2) 
  cat (laststr ++ firststr)                         
```

* Function dubmid takes a string, duplicates the middle character and gives out the string (Ex: hapy -> happy))
```
def dubmid fullstring =
  def Pair firststr laststr = 
    explode fullstring
    | splitAt (strlen fullstring / 2)
  def dupli = laststr | take 1
  cat (firststr ++ dupli ++ laststr)
```

* Takes a string and then removes the last character in a string
```
wake -x '"been"| explode | take 3| cat'
```

* Replaces the first charcter with the character "c"
```
wake -x '"bad"| explode | drop 1| prepend "c" | cat' 

> ```

Reviewer: In general, all these function examples its unclear what I am supposed to take from them

Author: If you want to play around with different built-in functions and to understand it more clearly we can use this as a example

### Tuple
A tuple is collection of items of different types. `get`,`set` and `edit` are the three inbuilt methods that can be used with the tuples.

> * Below example shows the declaration of a tuple. For more information about the tuple look into wake database

Reviewer 3: > For more information about the tuple look into wake database

I don't understand where this info is located. Can you add a link to what you're referring to?

Author: Sure. I will add a link at the beginning of the tutorial

> * Below example shows the declaration of a tuple. For more information about the tuple look into wake database

Reviewer: what?? This is the most confusing thing about reading wake code!!! Please explain it better in this tutorial!

Author: Sure

```

> def abcd = 1;"xx";1e5;Unit

Reviewer: I have no idea what I am supposed to take from this example.

Author: I will add a proper example in this case

```
### List
A List is a sequence of items of same type. Empty list returns `Nil`. `head` returns the first element in the list. `tail` returns the rest of the list without the `head`. 
* Example shows how to prepend the list of integers with the given value
```

> def d = 1,2,3,Nil

Reviewer: so all I need to do to create a list is to put `,` between elements and then end with `Nil`?

Author: Elements in a list are separated by commas and end with Nil

> def listprepend data1 = prepend data1 d

Reviewer: Is `prepend` a list keyword/builtin to wake? What other keywords/builtins exist?

Author: Yes it is wake built-in function. I have added the link to the wake library.

```

* Example creates a list of given elements
```

> def fone xx = xx,xx,xx,Nil

Reviewer: what is the name `fone` supposed to convey?

Author: Its just the function name. I will rename it properly

```
* Try out these examples
```

> wake -x '"south" | explode | take 1| cat'

Reviewer: you have not yet explained the `|` operator which is a key wake concept

Author: I will add this in the next commit

def last s = s| explode | reverse |take 1 | cat
```

* Try out these different set of examples and capture the result
```
def roll s = "{fourth s}{first s}{second s}{third s}"
def exch s = "{second s}{first s}{third s}{fourth s}"
```

* Below example shows how to declare a list of strings and apply map function to it. Map is a predefined function that maps to the every element in the list
```
def words = "ache", "vile", "amid", "evil", "ogre" , Nil
def mapping words = words | map roll
def mapping2 words = map exch words
```

* Try out these examples and record the results
```
def what fullstring = fullstring| roll | roll | roll| exch |  roll
def fb fullstring = fullstring | roll |roll | roll
def fc fullstring = fullstring | roll | exch |fb
def fd fullstring = fullstring | exch | fc | exch
```

* This examples convert the string "seat" -> "eats"
```
wake -x 'cat((tail (explode "seat")) ++(take 1(explode "seat")))'
```

### Type Inference
* Here the paramater c has to be string since function strlen as been applied to it, and b has to be integer as it is being added and a also should be an integer because it is list of integers 
```

> def madeup a b c =  (b + strlen c), a 

Reviewer: this is the first example with multiple parameters. Is it true that in wake you can't specify the type of your parameters? You had a long text description that is the case, shouldn't you say that much earlier?

what does the `(b+ strlen c), a` do? Is it thus assuming that `a` is a list and this is making two lists, or what?

Reviewer 4: Actually, `a` is a `List Integer` because `x, y` prepends element `x` to list `y`.

Reviewer: i mean, I am not really asking in the comments... can you make it more clear in the text? I am still in the dark whether you can specify the type of your parameters in wake or not, and if you can't how that information is propogated

Author: We cannot specify them explicitly. By looking at the the operations performed on the parameters we can understand what should be the parameters

```

> * Below example multiplies a given number by 6. The other way to implement this is (def times6 x = double x | triple) 

Reviewer: why not display "the other way" in the same way?

Author: In this particular example you can do in both the ways as multiplying (a*b)==(b*a). But in general ( ) have high precedence so they are done at the first go and then it is applied to triple () . Using | operator it makes more readable which operation to be performed first and the result is passed on to the next operation

## Wake Tutorial

### Invoking wake

> 1. Create a wake database: `wake --init .`

Reviewer 2: I am loving this tutorial. First off, can we have some definition... 

what is the wake database ? 
What will be in the database ? 
Once I do wake --init . in certain directory, when do I need to do it again ?

Author: You can delete the wake.db file and again do `wake --init .` and restart it from the scratch.

> 2. Run command for wake: `wake -vx '<function_name> <parameter_if_any>'`
> 
> 3. To know about various wake options run `wake --help`. `v` stands for verbosity and `x` stands for execute the expression.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Run command for wake: `wake -vx '<function_name> <parameter_if_any>'`

`v` stands for verbosity and `x` stands for execute the expression.

3. To know about various wake options run `wake --help`. 
```

Author: Done

> 4. Create a file with `.wake` extension and copy the functions mentioned in this tutorial and run them using `wake` command in the terminal.  

Reviewer: how do you run commands that are in a .wake file? The example you gave above doesn't show this.

Author: Added more clearer instructions to run the wake functions

5. For more information on wake library click [here](https://sifive.github.io/wake/)

### wake `Hello World`
* If you want to display a string you can do that using the below function by writing the string to be displayed inside "" and call the function abc . Ex: `wake -x 'abc'`. This will call the function `abc` and prints `Hello World`. 
```
def abc = "Hello World"

> ```

Reviewer: This would be more tutorial like. Tutorial needs to consist of commands that work when copy-pasted EXACTLY.
Is the below correct? I don't even know reading the text as currently written.

### wake `Hello World`
Put the following into a file called `helloworld.wake`:

```
def abc = "Hello World"
```

Then execute the following command:
```
wake -x 'abc'
``` 

This will call the function `abc` and print `Hello World`.

Author: I have added the explanation in the similar pattern

> * The other way to do this is `wake -x '"Hello World"'`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* You can also do this without a `.wake` file by doing it all in one command: `wake -x '"Hello World"'`
```

Author: Done

> ### Defining Functions

Reviewer 2: this may be the first time for a learner to see the wake function  and they may see this puzzling.  

for example, given, 
```
def abc = "Hello World"
def double x = 2*x
```

`wake -x 'abc' `returned  `"Hello World"`
`wake -x 'double'` (without argument) returned `<ttmp.wake:4:[16-18]>`

there got to be some explanation that the `wake -x 'double'` returned something (function reference maybe?) rather than an error. Where a user needs to go to read about more about this or is this tutorial a place to describe what is it and why is it useful?

Reviewer 2: wikipedia says: In functional programming, functions are treated as first-class citizens, meaning that they can be bound to names (including local identifiers), `passed as arguments, and returned from other functions`, etc. 

From that `wake -x 'double' `returned a function, it seems like wake seems like a functional programming language.  Shouldn't this doc state this up front so that readers know what to expect?

Author: The function double takes a parameter x. So by default you have to pass a parameter to it on which the multiplication happens and output is computed

> A function may be defined using the keyword `def`. Simple function definition takes the form

Reviewer 2: may be or should be ? 
may be gives impression that there are other ways to define them.

Author: `Should be`
I will make this change in the next release

`def <function name> <parameter list> = <expression>`

> 

Reviewer: are there types? Can you clarify right away if there is any way to define the type of arguments or return values?

Reviewer: also, is there anything *other* than `def`? Is there no `val`? That might be an important thing to state up front: "the only thing you can define are functions using `def` keyword".

Author: There is no `val`. We define everything using `def`

Author: There is no way to specify the type of arguments. In a multi-line function body return value is specified by the last line in the function

* Below function  double takes an argment x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 2
```
def double x = 2*x
```

* Below function triple takes an argument x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 3
```
def triple x = 3*x
```

* Function inc increments the values by 1 and returns the value
```
def inc x = x+1
```

> * Function adda takes an argument of type string and concatenates it with b and gives the output. `{ }` is the string interpolation operator

Reviewer: I'm not really sure what I am learning as a wake learner of all these different examples of functions. Can you clarify what you expect to get from each one? Like, I think the string interpolator example is good in that it shows the string interpolation operator, but that is probably more useful in a heading like "operations on strings" vs "functions". And the one below double (double x) is showing what, the use of parenthesis? Calling functions within another function? What should I take from that example?

```
def adda s = "{s}b"
```

* Function times4 takes an argument x and applies the function double twice on x
```
def times4 x = double (double x)
```

* Function aveI(averageOfInteger) takes 2 arguments x and y and adds two values and divide the result by 2. This function shows the other was of defining the parameters using lambda operator. The traditional way of defining the parameter is `def aveI x y = (x+y)/2`. Either of them are logically same.

> ```

Reviewer: you need to define and explain "the lambda operator" before just using it in the "functions" section.

Author: Okay sure

def aveI = \x\y (x+y)/2
```

* Function aveR(averageOfReal) takes 2 arguments of type double and divides the result by 2
```

> def aveR = \x\y (x +. y) /. 2.0

Reviewer 2: interesting to see +., -., *., /. are real number operators.

Author: Yes these are the operators that act on real numbers

```

* Function aveM(Modulus) adds 2 values and provides the remainder 
```
def aveM = \x\y (x+y) % 2
```

* Function duplicate concantenates or copies a given string twice
```
def duplicate s  ="{s}{s}"
```

> 

Reviewer: i think you should create a heading here "Important Built In Functions".
Then are you going to explain every single one? How can someone learn about other built in functions (provide link)

Author: I have added few Built-In functions used in this tutorial and explained them in short. 
I have already added the link at the beginning of this tutorial where we can find all the built-in functions as well

* integerToUnicode is a `wake built-in function` which takes the ASCII input and provides its equivalent character
```
wake -x 'integerToUnicode 99'
```

* unicodeToInteger is a `wake built-in function` which gives the ASCII value of the given character.
```
wake -x 'unicodeToInteger "a"'
```

* strlen is a `wake built-in function` which returns the length of the given string.
```
wake -x 'strlen "abcde"'
```

> * `|`is the pipeFn which takes the argument from the left hand side of the `|` and provides it to the right hand side function. This makes the function to be more readable. `(a(b(c(d))))` is represented as `d | c | b | a`. In both the cases d is evaluated first then followed by c , b and a.

Reviewer: i think you should make a heading here about parenthesis vs pipe, and them move the `double (dobule x) ` example here and how how it an be written with the parens and with the pipe

Author: Done

> ### Wake Built-In Functions

Reviewer: it really seems like you should say something about data types, especially Lists, before going into all this

Author: Done

> Few of the commonly used built-in functions in this tutorial is given below

Reviewer: can you break these up into operations on strings and operations on lists? For example, `explode` seems to be string specific. Is `cat` only for strings, or can you `cat` two lists of something that aren't strings?

Author: I can do that. 
Yes `explode` is string specific.
`cat` works only for strings

> * `explode` breaks the string into a list of string character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `explode` breaks a string into a list of string character.
```

Author: Done

* `take` takes first `n` elements in the list.
* `drop` drops first `n` elements in the list.
* `reverse` reverses the elements in the list.
* `head` returns the first element in the list.
* `tail` returns the list by removing the `head`.
* `cat` concatenates the elements in list of string to a string. 
* `prepend` places the given data at the begining(head) of the given list

> * `append` appends the given data at the end of the given list  

Reviewer: how can I join two lists? Is there an operator for that?

Author: Yes there is an operator. `++`  concatenates the list

> * Below function takes a string and returns the middle character of the string.

Reviewer: this is a nice example, but it depends on `strlen` which is not defined in the above. Is `strlen` another important string builtin function?

on that note, is there a `len` builtin for lists?

Author: Yes `strlen` is a string builtin function which returns the length of the string
`len` is a builtin functions which returns the length of the list

```
def middle fullstring =
  def len = if (strlen fullstring % 2 == 0) then (strlen fullstring / 2) else  ((strlen fullstring / 2) + 1)
  def outputstr = explode fullstring | take len | reverse | head 
  outputstr
```

* Below function takes a string and returns the string removing the first and last character.
```
def dtrunc fullstring =
  def len = strlen fullstring
  def outputstr = explode fullstring | take (len-1) | tail | cat
  outputstr
```

> * Function incfirst takes a string and a character string and replaces the first character of the string with the given character string

Reviewer: what is a "character string"? do you mean "list of characters"?

Author: Typo error. It has to be character

### List
A List is a sequence of items of same type. Empty list returns `Nil`. `head` returns the first element in the list. `tail` returns the rest of the list without the `head`. 
* Example shows how to prepend the list of integers with the given value
```
def d = 1,2,3,Nil
def listprepend data1 = prepend data1 d
```

* Example creates a list of given elements
```
def listcreate xx = xx,xx,xx,Nil
```
* Try out these examples
```
wake -x '"south" | explode | take 1| cat'
wake -x '"north"| explode | tail | take 1 | cat'
wake -x '"east" | explode| reverse | take 1 |cat'
wake -x '"west" | explode | reverse | tail |take 1| cat'
```

* Below are the set of examples which shows how to extract specific characters from a string
```
def first s = s | explode | take 1| cat
def second s = s | explode | tail | take 1 | cat
def third s = s | explode| tail | tail | take 1 |cat
def fourth s =  s | explode | tail | tail | tail | take 1| cat
def last s = s| explode | reverse |take 1 | cat
```

* Try out these different set of examples and capture the result
```
def roll s = "{fourth s}{first s}{second s}{third s}"
def exch s = "{second s}{first s}{third s}{fourth s}"
```

> * Below example shows how to declare a list of strings and apply map function to it. Map is a predefined function that maps to the every element in the list

Reviewer: I thik you should add `map` to your list of important predefined functions, or explain each function in this way with an example. Mixing them up with some in the list and some only introduced in examples is confusing

Author: Done

```
def words = "ache", "vile", "amid", "evil", "ogre" , Nil
def mapping words = words | map roll
def mapping2 words = map exch words
```

* Try out these examples and record the results
```
def what fullstring = fullstring| roll | roll | roll| exch |  roll
def fb fullstring = fullstring | roll |roll | roll
def fc fullstring = fullstring | roll | exch |fb
def fd fullstring = fullstring | exch | fc | exch
```

* This examples convert the string "seat" -> "eats"
```
wake -x 'cat((tail (explode "seat")) ++(take 1(explode "seat")))'
```

### Type Inference
* Here the paramater c has to be string since function strlen as been applied to it, and b has to be integer as it is being added and a also should be an integer because it is list of integers 
```
def madeup a b c =  (b + strlen c), a 
```

> * Below example multiplies a given number by 6. The other way to implement this is `def times6 x = double x | triple`

Reviewer: what does this have to do with type inference?

Author: I will move the Type Inference as a separate section to avoid the confusion

```
def times6 x = triple (double x)
```

> * Funtion tea shows the way to pass a function as a argument 

Reviewer: what does this have to do with type inference?

Author: I will move the Type Inference as a separate section to avoid the confusion

```

> def tea f = f 4

Reviewer: why is this called `tea`

Author: Just a function name.

Reviewer: can you name it something more descriptive? Like "applyToTheNumberFour"?

```

* Try out these examples and record the result
```
def op1 = triple (inc 1)
def op2 = inc 1 | triple
def op3 = double (inc (triple 1))
def op4 = triple (inc (double 1))
def op5 = tea double
def op6 = tea inc
def op7 = tea inc | double 
def op8 = map double (1,2,3,Nil)
def op9 = map double (1,2,3,Nil) | map inc
```

> * Adds 2 integer values and gives out the result

Reviewer: again what does this have to do with this section, what are you trying to show here

```
def sumadd x y = x+y 
```
### Pattern Matching

> ```

Reviewer: what are you trying to show here, can you add some explanation

* sumenes 8 = 8+6+4+2+0 = 20
`def sumevens n = if (n==0) then 0 else if (n%2 ==0) then n + sumevens (n-2) else n`

* power 2 3 = 8
`def power x n = x^n`

```
def natstring = "succ"
def nat n = match n 
  0 = "zero"
  n = "{natstring}({nat(n-1)})"
```

* Adds all the elements in a list and provids the sum
```
def sum n = match n 
  Nil = 0
  h,t = h + sum t
```

* concantenates 2 lists using ++ operator
`wake -x '(1,2,3,Nil) ++ (4,5,6,Nil)'`

* Doubles every element in the list
```
def doublelist n = match n
    Nil = Nil
    h,t = 2*h, doublelist t
```
* The other way of multiplying every element in a list
`def doublelist2 = map (2*_)`

* Duplicates every element in a list
```
def dupelist n = match n
    Nil = Nil
    h,t = (h,h,Nil)++ dupelist t
```

* Below are the examples which does similar functionality as above
```
def dupelist2 = foldr (\x \y x,x,y) Nil

def dupelist1 n = mapFlat (\x (x,x,Nil) ) n

def dupelist3 = mapFlat (\x (x,x,Nil) ) 
```

* Returns the length of a list
`def length n = len n`

* Multiples every element in a list and gives the result
`def prodlist n = foldr (_ * _)1 n`

* vallist ("1","2","3","4",Nil) = (1,2,3,4,Nil)

> `def vallist n =n | map (\x x | int | getOrElse 0)`

Reviewer 2: getOrElse is used here first time. Maybe direct readers to the section describing Option?

Reviewer 2: nice!!!

  North
  South
  East
  West
```

* Example shows the data type Money which can be in the form of Cash or the Cheque.
```
global data Money =
  Cash Integer
  Cheque (Pair String Double)
```
```
def amount  = Cash 50
def chequeamount = Cheque (Pair "HDFC" 350.00)
```

* Try out these and record the output
```
def queuePut x r = foldl (\a\b b,a)x r
def queuePut1 r = foldl (\a\b b,a) Nil r
```

* Try out these examples
```
def listexample1 l e = l ++ (e,Nil)
def listexample2 l = l | head | getOrElse 0 
def listexample3 l = l | tail
```
`wake -x '("abc","def",Nil) | map(explode)|map ( head)'`

* Find the sum of elements in a list using foldr function. Here n refers to the deafult value which the function retursn if the list l is empty(Nil).
`def suma l n= l | foldr(_+_)n`

* Nested Function: Example
```
def foo n = match n 
  0 = "toff"
  n = bar(n-1)
def bar n = match n
  0 = "beerut"
  n = foo(n-1)
```

* Finds the mean in the given list of integers
`def mean l = l | foldr(_+_)0 | (\x x/ len l)`

* Finds the median in the given list of integers
```
def median l = 
  def length = if (len l %2 ==0) then ((len l) /2)-1 else ((len l)/2)
  l | drop length | head
```

> ### Queues

Reviewer: is a queue a built in wake thing or is this some example of how to make a Queue? The heading is really confusing

Author: No. Its not a built-in wake thing. It shows how to create a queue and try adding and removing the data

`"ivan" $$ "tanya" $$ "boris" $$ P`
* Created a data type Queue which is nothing but a FIFO.
```
data Queue a = 
  P
  a $$ Queue a
```
The operations on a queue are front and remove. front returns the element at the front of the queue (without altering the queue), remove returns the rest of the queue with the first element removed. Note that both of these are strictly functions not procedures, remove does not change an existing queue it simply returns part of the queue, the original is still intact after the function call.

* front returns the first element in a queue
```
def front = match _
  x$$P = x$$P
  P = P
  x$$q = front q
```

* remove returns the rest of the queue leaving the first element in the queue
```
def remove = match _
  x$$P = P
  P = P
  x$$q = x $$ (remove q)
```

* Converts list into a queue
```
def l2q = match _
  Nil = P
  h,t = h $$ (l2q t)
```

* Converts queue to a list
```
def q2l = match _
  P = Nil
  x$$q = x,(q2l q)
```

* Reverses the order of the queue
```
def doomsday = match _
  P = P
  q = front q $$ doomsday (remove q)
```
## Tree

> Tree is already implemented in wake by default.

Reviewer: what is a Tree?

Author: Added the explanation

Reviewer 2: you mean Binary Tree ? 
wake -x 'seq 5 |map str| listToTree (_ <=>* _)'
(Bin 5 (Bin 2 (Bin 1 Tip "0" Tip) "1" Tip) "2" (Bin 2 (Bin 1 Tip "3" Tip) "4" Tip))
```
     2
    / \
   /   \
  1     4
 /     /  
0     3 
```

* Creates a Tree from a list
`wake -x 'seq 5 |map str| listToTree (_ <=>* _)'`
`wake -x 'listToTree (_ <=> _) (seq 20)'`

> 

Reviewer: No where in this tutorial have you explained the concept of "case classes" or whatever wake calls them and the confusing operators that get created that modify case classes. This is like 99% of the wake code that people seem to actually write at SiFive, not complicated math and map stuff, so please define those and delete a bunch of the function examples that aren't that helpful. Every example that you show should have a clear reason for its existence and thought about what you are tryign to show with that example

Reviewer 2: Are you stating this doc should have explanation / examples of the Option ? Yes, I'd like to learn about it.

Reviewer 2: add newlines ... two wake commands are sitting in one line when view the file.

Author: Done

2. `cd` into the directory. `cd /scratch/<your_name>/wake_tutorial`.

3. Create a wake database: `wake --init .`.After this you will see a `wake.db` file created inside the folder.

4. Create a file with `.wake` extension and copy the functions mentioned in this tutorial and run using `wake` command in the terminal as mentioned in Step 5.  

5. Run command for wake: `wake -vx '<function_name> <parameter_if_any>'`. Ex: `wake -x 'double 2'`.
   
   `v` stands for verbosity and `x` stands for execute the expression.

6. To know about various wake options run `wake --help`. 

7. For more information on wake library click [here](https://sifive.github.io/wake/).

### wake `Hello World`
* If you want to display a string you can do that using the below function by writing the string to be displayed inside "" and call the function `abc`.

Copy the below function into a `.wake` file you created in step 4
```
def abc = "Hello World"
```
Then execute the following command 
```
wake -x 'abc'
```
This will call the function `abc` and print `Hello World`.

* You can also do this without a `.wake` file by doing it all in one command: `wake -x '"Hello World"'`

> ### Defining Functions

Reviewer 2: wake is a functional programming language. Is this doc assume that readers have background knowledge about it? When readers (having only c++ background) are puzzled in  `def tea f = f 4 `or 'higher order function' in Map section, where they should go to get more info?

## Wake Tutorial

> 

Reviewer: Can you add an intro here, like "This tutorial will teach you ...... After completing this tutorial, you will have .....

Right now it is something like "This tutorial will teach you the basics of the wake language. ... you will have typed and executed many basic wake functions".

Author: Sure. I will add this.

Author: I will add this

* `+` Addition Operator
* `-` Subtraction Operator
* `*` Multiplication Operator
* `/` Division Operator
* `^` Exponent Operator
* `%` Modulus Operator
* `>>` Right shift Operator
* `<<` Left shift Operator

#### Few operators that work on Double data type
* `+.` Addition Operator
* `-.` Subtraction Operator
* `*.` Multiplication Operator
* `/.` Division Operator
* `^.` Exponent Operator

* Below function  double takes an argment x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 2
```
def double x = 2*x
```

* Below function triple takes an argument x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 3
```
def triple x = 3*x
```

* Function inc increments the values by 1 and returns the value
```
def inc x = x+1
```

* Function adda takes an argument of type string and concatenates it with b and gives the output. `{ }` is the string interpolation operator
```
def adda s = "{s}b"
```

* Function times4 takes an argument x and applies the function double twice on x
```
def times4 x = double (double x)
```

* Adds 2 integer values and gives out the result
```
def sumadd x y = x+y 
```

* power 2 3 = 8
```
def power x n = x^n
```

#### lambda operator (\)

> The lambda operator can be used to define paramaters of a function. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The lambda operator `\` is an alternative way to define the parameters of a function. 
```

Reviewer: High level `wake` question... we dont seem to use this in any of the examples. Can we just discourage its use? Why do we need both?

Reviewer: ok actually you do show it later, but not in this way. Could you give an example of the form where you use it in an anonymous function  right away here? Or save the introduction of the lambda operator til you get to the map / higher order functions explanation

> * Function aveI(averageOfInteger) takes 2 arguments x and y and adds two values and divide the result by 2. This function shows the other was of defining the parameters using lambda operator. The traditional way of defining the parameter is `def aveI x y = (x+y)/2`. Either of them are logically same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Function aveI(averageOfInteger) takes 2 arguments x and y. It adds the two values and divides the result by 2. Previously we saw we could define this as `def aveI x y = (x+y)/2`.  The function below shows the lambda operator way of defining the parameters. The two definitions are logically the same.
```

Author: Done

```
def aveI = \x\y (x+y)/2
```

* Function aveR(averageOfReal) takes 2 arguments of type double and divides the result by 2
```
def aveR = \x\y (x +. y) /. 2.0
```

* Function aveM(Modulus) adds 2 values and provides the remainder 
```
def aveM = \x\y (x+y) % 2
```

### Wake Built-In Functions
Few of the commonly used built-in functions in this tutorial is given below
#### Operation on String
* `explode` breaks a string into a list of string character.
* `strlen` returns the length of the given string.
* `cat` concatenates the elements in list of string to a string. 
#### Operation on List
* `take` takes first `n` elements in the list.
* `drop` drops first `n` elements in the list.
* `reverse` reverses the elements in the list.
* `head` returns the first element in the list.
* `tail` returns the list by removing the `head`.
* `prepend` places the given data at the begining(head) of the given list.
* `append` appends the given data at the end of the given list.
* `++` concatenates any number of list into a single list.
* `len` returns the length of the given list.

* Function duplicate concantenates or copies a given string twice
```
def duplicate s  ="{s}{s}"
```

> * integerToUnicode is a `wake built-in function` which takes the ASCII input and provides its equivalent character

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#### Miscellaneous Built In Functions

* integerToUnicode is a `wake built-in function` which takes the ASCII input and provides its equivalent character
```

Author: Done

```
wake -x 'integerToUnicode 99'
```

* unicodeToInteger is a `wake built-in function` which gives the ASCII value of the given character.
```
wake -x 'unicodeToInteger "a"'
```

> * strlen is a `wake built-in function` which returns the length of the given string.

Reviewer: move this up to the "string builtin functions" section

Author: Okay

```
wake -x 'strlen "abcde"'
```

### List
A List is a sequence of items of same type. Empty list returns `Nil`. `head` returns the first element in the list. `tail` returns the rest of the list without the `head`.

* Example creates a list of given elements
```
def listcreate xx = xx,xx,xx,Nil
```
 
* Example shows how to prepend the list of integers with the given value
```
def d = 1,2,3,Nil
def listprepend data1 = prepend data1 d
```

* concantenates 2 lists using ++ operator
```

> wake -x '(1,2,3,Nil) ++ (4,5,6,Nil)'

Reviewer: whats the purpose of the parentheses? Do I need them? we haven't really explained the role of parens in wake

Author: Parenthesis in wake is used to enforce a specific order of evaluation(precedence of operators) in expressions.

Reviewer: Can you say that? what if I wrote:

wake -x '1,2,3,Nil ++ 4,5,6,Nil'

would it still work?

Author: No this will throw an error

```

### Type Inference

> * Here the paramater c has to be string since function strlen as been applied to it, and b has to be integer as it is being added to the output of `strlen c` and a is list of integers which prepends the output of `(b + strlen c)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Here the parameter c has to be string since function strlen as been applied to it, and b has to be integer as it is being added to the output of `strlen c` and a is list of integers which prepends the output of `(b + strlen c)`.
```

Author: Done

> * Here the paramater c has to be string since function strlen as been applied to it, and b has to be integer as it is being added to the output of `strlen c` and a is list of integers which prepends the output of `(b + strlen c)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`wake` does not allow you to specify the types of parameters or return values. All types are inferred.

* Here:
** the parameter `c` has to be string since function `strlen` has been applied to it
** `b` has to be integer as it is being added to the output of `strlen c` 
** `a` is a list of integers because it prepends the output of `(b + strlen c)`.
```

Author: Sure. I will add this

```
def madeup a b c =  (b + strlen c), a 
```

> #### Parenthesis vs Pipe

Reviewer: why is this under the "Type Inference" Heading?

Author: Those are 2 separate sections

* `|`is the pipeFn which takes the argument from the left hand side of the `|` and provides it to the right hand side function. This makes the function to be more readable. `(a(b(c(d))))` is represented as `d | c | b | a`. In both the cases d is evaluated first then followed by c , b and a.
```
def reversestring s = cat (reverse (explode (s)))
```

The same can be expressed with the pipe function as below
```
def reversestring s = s | explode | reverse | cat
```

* Below function takes a string and returns the middle character of the string.
```
def middle fullstring =

>   def slength = if (strlen fullstring % 2 == 0) then (strlen fullstring / 2) else  ((strlen fullstring / 2) + 1)

Reviewer: this is the first time we mentioned "if, then, else" syntax...

Author: I have added the explanation

Author: Added the explanation

>   def outputstr = explode fullstring | take slength | reverse | head 

Reviewer: it seems like back in the `def` functions section we should explain that you can arbitrarily deeply put `def` inside of other `def`. And demonstrate that you can't "see" the `def` outside the appropriate name space.

It might be nice to show the kinds of error messages people will encounter if they do such a thing

Author: Added the explnation

def fd fullstring = fullstring | exch | fc | exch
```

* This examples convert the string "seat" -> "eats"
```
wake -x 'cat((tail (explode "seat")) ++(take 1(explode "seat")))'
```

### Tuple
A tuple is collection of items of different types. `get`,`set` and `edit` are the three inbuilt methods that can be used with the tuples.
* Below example shows the declaration of a tuple. 
```
tuple Collection =
  global IntValue : Integer
  global DoubleValue : Double
  global StringValue : String
```

`set<tuple name><field Name>` 
`set` operation sets(writes) value to the tuple field
`get<tuple name><field Name>` 
`get` operation gets(reads) value to the tuple field
`edit<tuple name><field Name>` 
`edit` operation moidfies value to the tuple field

### Map
Map is a higher order function which takes a function and applies the same to every element in the list.

* Below example shows how to declare a list of strings and apply map function to it. Map is a predefined function that maps to the every element in the list
```
def words = "ache", "vile", "amid", "evil", "ogre" , Nil
def mapping words = words | map roll
def mapping2 words = map exch words
```

### Higher Order function

> A function which does one of the following is a higher order function

Reviewer: shouldn't this definition of a Higher Order function come before your use of it in defining `map` just above?

Author: Done

1. Takes one or more functions as argument
2. Returns a function as its result

* Funtion tea shows the way to pass a function as a argument 
```
def tea f = f 4
```
* `Map is the best example for a Higher Order Function` 

* Try out these examples and record the result
```
def op1 = triple (inc 1)
def op2 = inc 1 | triple
def op3 = double (inc (triple 1))
def op4 = triple (inc (double 1))
def op5 = tea double
def op6 = tea inc
def op7 = tea inc | double 
def op8 = map double (1,2,3,Nil)
def op9 = map double (1,2,3,Nil) | map inc
```

> * Below example multiplies a given number by 6. The other way to implement this is `def times6 x = double x | triple`

Reviewer: what is the point of this example right here? I don't think this is a higher order function and you already showed similar things... can you just delete the `times6` example?

Author: Okay

```
def times6 x = triple (double x)
```

### Pattern Matching

> The first thing that comes to mind is string matching. It is similar to the Switch statement where it will check for the matching case and outputs appropriate results.

Reviewer: You have three examples of simple string matching. Is that it? Is regular expression matching thing? Or are we going to show more examples later... reading on.

  n = h(n-1) + h(n-1) 

def j = match _
  0 = Nil
  n = (n % 2),j(n / 2)

def m a b = match a b
  _ 0 = 0
  a b = a + (m a (b - 1))

def f = match _
  0 = 0
  n = 1 - f (n-1)

def g = match _
  0 = 0
  n = g (n-1) + 2 * (n-1)

def l = match _
  0 = 0
  n = n % 10 + l (n / 10) 
```

* sumto 4 = 4+3+2+1+0
```
def sumto n = match n
  0 = 0
  n = n + sumto (n-1)
```
			
* listfrom 4 = (4,3,2,1,Nil)
```
def listfrom n = match n
  0 = Nil
  n = n , listfrom (n - 1)
```

* strcopy "ab" 4 = "abababab"
```
def strcopy str n = match n 
  0 = ""
  n = "{str}{strcopy str (n-1)}"
```

* listcopy 7 4 = (7,7,7,7,Nil)
```
def listcopy l n = match n
  0 = Nil
  n = l ,listcopy l (n-1)
```

* listto 4 = (1,2,3,4,Nil)
```
def listto n = listfrom n | reverse
```

* listodd 7 = (7,5,3,1,Nil)
```
def listodd n = if(n<0) then Nil else if(n%2 ==1) then n,listodd (n-2) else n
```

* sumenes 8 = 8+6+4+2+0 = 20
```
def sumevens n = if (n==0) then 0 else if (n%2 ==0) then n + sumevens (n-2) else n
```

```
def natstring = "succ"
def nat n = match n 
  0 = "zero"
  n = "{natstring}({nat(n-1)})"
```
#### Recursion On Lists
* Adds all the elements in a list and provids the sum
```
def sum n = match n 
  Nil = 0

>   h,t = h + sum t

Reviewer: this "matching" on a list of `head, the rest of the list` is pretty nonintuitive and deserves some more explanation. Perhaps up where you had the pattern matching section about strings, you could give some examples of matching on lists of things

Author: I will add the explanation

```

* Doubles every element in the list
```
def doublelist n = match n
    Nil = Nil
    h,t = 2*h, doublelist t
```
* The other way of multiplying every element in a list
```
def doublelist2 = map (2*_)
```

* Duplicates every element in a list
```
def dupelist n = match n
    Nil = Nil
    h,t = (h,h,Nil)++ dupelist t
```

* Below are the examples which does similar functionality as above
```

> def dupelist2 = foldr (\x \y x,x,y) Nil

Reviewer: this use of the lambda operator is something that you didn't actually explain when you showed the lambda operator.

Author: Okay

def dupelist1 n = mapFlat (\x (x,x,Nil) ) n

def dupelist3 = mapFlat (\x (x,x,Nil) ) 
```
#### More Examples
* Returns the length of a list
```
def length n = len n
```

* Multiples every element in a list and gives the result
```

> def prodlist n = foldr (_ * _)1 n

Reviewer: what is this `_` stuff. Needs explanation,.

Author: Added

```

* vallist ("1","2","3","4",Nil) = (1,2,3,4,Nil)
```

> def vallist n =n | map (\x x | int | getOrElse 0)

Reviewer: what is `getOrElse`. I think you need to explain Options , perhaps right after you explain Lists

Author: Added the explanation

Reviewer: I don't see any explanation about options

Author: I will add it in the next push

```

* spacelist ("1","2","3",Nil) = ("1","","2","","3","",Nil) 
```

> def spacelist n = n | mapFlat (\x(x,"",Nil))

Reviewer: is mapFlat a builtin?

Author: Yes i have added the explanation in the beginning

Author: yes. Explanation is being added

```

> * flatten converts list if lists into a list

Reviewer: is flatten a builtin on lists? can you just put it up in the builtin section?

Author: Done

Author: Done

```
wake -x 'flatten ((1,2,3,Nil),(4,5,6,Nil),Nil)'
```

* Returns the last element in the list
```
def last1 n = n | reverse | head
```

> * Finds a given element in a given list or else returns None 

Reviewer: what is `None`

Author: None means `nothing` . `find` will apply a function and returns `Option(Pair a Integer)`

Author: Options will return either return `Some x`  which is value x or `None` which means nothing

Reviewer: i know what an option is. You haven't mentioned the fact that wake has Option types in this tutorial so it's frustrating to a new user to see things used without defining them

Author: I will add the the explanation in the next push. As of now i am trying to answer here also so that people can infer to this as well

```
wake -x '(1,2,3,1,Nil)| find (\x x==2)'
```

* Multiply every element in list by 4
```
wake -x '(1,2,3,Nil)|map (\x 4*x)'
```

* Counts the no of 1's in a given list
```

> def count1 n = n | filter (\x x == 1) | len  

Reviewer: what is `filter`

Author: `filter` is a wake built-in which applies a function to the list and returns a new list

```

* Creates a list of Pairs
```

> def zipop n m =  zip n m

Reviewer: what is `zip`

Author: `zip` takes 2 lists and returns a list of Pairs

Reviewer: I know (or can assume) what `zip` does, but from a tutorial sense you can't just put something in that you don't explain

All my questions are basically asking you to not use something you haven't defined.

Author: I will add the explanation for `zip` at the beginning

```

* Concantenates 2 lists by taking elements from each lists alternatively
```

> def altern n m = zip n m | mapFlat (\x (x.getPairFirst, x.getPairSecond,Nil) )

Reviewer: what is `getPairFirst`, `getPairSecond`

Author: Helper functions to access the first and second data of the Pair

  h,t = if (h ==* " ") then h,takespace t else Nil
```

* Concantenates every list of string with "io"
```
def map1 n = n | map (\s "{s}io")
```

* Creates a list (list Integers) from a given list of integers
```
def map2 n = n | map (\x x,Nil)
```

* Outputs the first element from the list (list Integers)
```
def map3 n = n | map (\x x | head | getOrElse 0)
```

* Creates a list of strings by talking the last character of a string
```
def map4 n = n | map (\x last x)
```

* Multiplies every element of the list by 3
```
def ftrl n = n | map (\x 3*x)
```

* Takes the first character from the list of strings and creates a new list
```
def fhel n = n | map (\x first x)
```

* removes first 2 characters from the list of strings and creates a new list
```
def tailstring n = n | explode | drop 1 |cat
def fttl n = n | map (\x tailstring x)
```

* Prepend and Appends every element in a list of string by "s" "m"
```
def fsml n = n | map (\x "s{x}m")
```

### Creating your own Data types
* Example shows how to create a data type of our own
```
global data Direction =
  North
  South
  East
  West
```

* Example shows the data type Money which can be in the form of Cash or the Cheque.
```

> global data Money =

Reviewer: what is `global data`?

Reviewer: what I mean is, what if I don't add the `global` keyword? this is the first time I have seen it. Should I be adding `global` to my `def` as well?

Author: `global` is a keyword that allows the user to access the function or data outside the scope of file where they are defined.
yes. you can add `global` to `def` as well to make it as a global function

  Cash Integer

>   Cheque (Pair String Double)

Reviewer: what is a `Pair`

```
```
def amount  = Cash 50
def chequeamount = Cheque (Pair "HDFC" 350.00)

> ```

Reviewer: Ok, I feel like there are a ton of questions around this:

how can I see the elements of a `Cheque`? Say I want to make a new `Cheque` for 2x the amount, how is that done?

Doesn't wake create magic functions for these, like `setCheque...`

Author: Pair has the magic functions which a tuple has.  We should extract the Pair using match function and use `setPairSecond`.

> * Try out these and record the output

Reviewer: what does this have to do with "creating your own data types"

Author: I have restructured that part

```
def queuePut x r = foldl (\a\b b,a)x r
def queuePut1 r = foldl (\a\b b,a) Nil r
```

* Try out these examples
```
def listexample1 l e = l ++ (e,Nil)
def listexample2 l = l | head | getOrElse 0 
def listexample3 l = l | tail
```
`wake -x '("abc","def",Nil) | map(explode)|map ( head)'`

* Find the sum of elements in a list using foldr function. Here n refers to the deafult value which the function returns if the list l is empty(Nil).
```
def suma l n= l | foldr(_+_)n
```

* Finds the mean in the given list of integers
```
def mean l = l | foldr(_+_)0 | (\x x/ len l)
```

* Finds the median in the given list of integers
```
def median l = 
  def length = if (len l %2 ==0) then ((len l) /2)-1 else ((len l)/2)
  l | drop length | head
```

> #### Mutually Recursive Functions: Example

Reviewer: what is the point of this section? why is it important for people to know?

Author: Just an example of how mutually recursive functions being called

## Wake Tutorial

This tutorial will teach you the basics of Wake language. After completeing this tutorial, you will have typed and executed many basic wake functions.

### Invoking wake

1. Create a folder inside `/scratch` directory. `mkdir /scratch/<your_name>/wake_tutorial`.

2. `cd` into the directory. `cd /scratch/<your_name>/wake_tutorial`.

3. Create a wake database: `wake --init .`.After this you will see a `wake.db` file created inside the folder.

4. Create a file with `.wake` extension and copy the functions mentioned in this tutorial and run using `wake` command in the terminal as mentioned in Step 5.  

> 5. Run command for wake: `wake -vx '<function_name> <parameter_if_any>'`. Ex: `wake -x 'double 2'`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Run command for wake: `wake -vx '<function_name> <parameter_if_any>'`. Ex: `wake -vx 'double 2'`.
```

Author: Done

   
   `v` stands for verbosity and `x` stands for execute the expression.

6. To know about various wake options run `wake --help`. 

7. For more information on wake library click [here](https://sifive.github.io/wake/).

### wake `Hello World`

Copy the below function into a `.wake` file you created in step 4
```
def abc = "Hello World"
```
Then execute the following command 
```
wake -x 'abc'
```
This will call the function `abc` and print `Hello World`.

* You can also do this without a `.wake` file by doing it all in one command: `wake -x '"Hello World"'`

### Defining Functions
A function should be defined using the keyword `def`. Simple function definition takes the form
`def <function name> <parameter list> = <expression>`

We cannot specify explicitly the return type and type of the parameters. When the function body is of multi-line the return value is specified by the last line in the function.

> Functions can be defined with the keyword `global` which makes the function to be accessed outside the file where it is being defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Functions can be defined with the keyword `global` which makes the function to be accessed from other .wake files other than the one where it is defined.
```

Author: when it is defined as `global` you can use those functions or the values by calling them in other wake files as well.

We can arbitrarily deeply put `def` inside another `def`. The internal `def` is bound to the function itself and cannot be accesible outside the function.

Note: The only thing you can define are functions using `def` keyword. In wake we do everything with functions.

#### Few operators that work on Integer data type
* `+` Addition Operator
* `-` Subtraction Operator
* `*` Multiplication Operator
* `/` Division Operator
* `^` Exponent Operator
* `%` Modulus Operator
* `>>` Right shift Operator
* `<<` Left shift Operator

#### Few operators that work on Double data type
* `+.` Addition Operator
* `-.` Subtraction Operator
* `*.` Multiplication Operator
* `/.` Division Operator
* `^.` Exponent Operator

* Below function  double takes an argment x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 2.
```
def double x = 2*x
```

* Below function triple takes an argument x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 3.
```
def triple x = 3*x
```

* Function inc increments the values by 1 and returns the value.
```
def inc x = x+1
```

> * Function adda takes an argument of type string and concatenates it with b and gives the output. `{ }` is the string interpolation operator.
> ```
> def adda s = "{s}b"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Function addb takes an argument of type string and concatenates it with b and gives the output. `{ }` is the string interpolation operator.
```
def addb s = "{s}b"
```

Author: Done

```

### Wake Built-In Functions
Few of the commonly used built-in functions in this tutorial is given below
#### Operation on String
* `explode` breaks a string into a list of string character.
* `strlen` returns the length of the given string.
* `cat` concatenates the elements in list of string to a string. 

* strlen returns the length of the given string.
```
wake -x 'strlen "abcde"'
```

#### Operation on List
* `take` takes first `n` elements in the list.
* `drop` drops first `n` elements in the list.
* `reverse` reverses the elements in the list.
* `head` returns the first element in the list.
* `tail` returns the list by removing the `head`.
* `prepend` places the given data at the begining(head) of the given list.
* `append` appends the given data at the end of the given list.
* `++` concatenates any number of list into a single list.
* `len` returns the length of the given list.
* `flatten` converts the list of list into a list.
* `mapFlat` applies a function to each element in the list and builds a new list from the resulting elements.
* `filter`  applies a function and builds a new list from it.
* `zip` takes 2 lists and converts them to list of Pairs.

> * Function duplicate concantenates or copies a given string twice.

Reviewer: can you move this example up to the ### Operations on string, and mention the string interpolator operator there?

Author: Done

```
def duplicate s  ="{s}{s}"
```
#### Miscellaneous Built-In Functions 
* integerToUnicode is a `wake built-in function` which takes the ASCII input and provides its equivalent character.
```
wake -x 'integerToUnicode 99'
```

* unicodeToInteger is a `wake built-in function` which gives the ASCII value of the given character.
```
wake -x 'unicodeToInteger "a"'
```

### List
A List is a sequence of items of same type. Empty list returns `Nil`. `head` returns the first element in the list. `tail` returns the rest of the list without the `head`.

* Example creates a list of given elements.
```
def listcreate xx = xx,xx,xx,Nil
```
 
* Example shows how to prepend the list of integers with the given value.
```
def d = 1,2,3,Nil
def listprepend data1 = prepend data1 d
```

* `Note: Parenthesis in wake is used to enforce a specific order of evaluation(precedence of operators) in expressions.`
* concantenates 2 lists using ++ operator
```
wake -x '(1,2,3,Nil) ++ (4,5,6,Nil)'
```
### Option
`Option` is a data type in wake. It will either return `Some x` which is a value `x` or `None` which means nothing.

> 

Reviewer: how do you create a Some x or a None? I couldn't figure out how to *create* an option vs matching against one. It's not:

`Some 3`.

Is it `3.Some`?

Reviewer 4: It is `Some `...

```
def reversestring s = cat (reverse (explode (s)))
```

The same can be expressed with the pipe function as below
```
def reversestring s = s | explode | reverse | cat
```
#### `if`..`then`..`else`..
It is similar to the traditional `if` construct we use in C language. `if(condition == true)` `then (do this)` `else (do something else)`

* Below function takes a string and returns the middle character of the string.
```
def middle fullstring =
  def slength = if (strlen fullstring % 2 == 0) then (strlen fullstring / 2) else  ((strlen fullstring / 2) + 1)
  def outputstr = explode fullstring | take slength | reverse | head 
  outputstr
```

* Below function takes a string and returns the string removing the first and last character.
```
def dtrunc fullstring =
  def slength = strlen fullstring
  def outputstr = explode fullstring | take (slength-1) | tail | cat
  outputstr
```

* Function incfirst takes a string and a character and replaces the first character of the string with the given character.
```
def incfirst fullstring chrstr = explode fullstring | tail | prepend chrstr | cat
```

> * `Pair` carry 2 fields which is `First` and `Second`. The datatype of the `First` and `Second` can be anything and datatype is determined while we are creating a `Pair`

Author: Sure.

```

* Below are the set of examples which shows how to extract specific characters from a string
```
def first s = s | explode | take 1| cat
def second s = s | explode | tail | take 1 | cat
def third s = s | explode| tail | tail | take 1 |cat
def fourth s =  s | explode | tail | tail | tail | take 1| cat
def last s = s| explode | reverse |take 1 | cat
```

* Try out these different set of examples and capture the result
```
def roll s = "{fourth s}{first s}{second s}{third s}"
def exch s = "{second s}{first s}{third s}{fourth s}"
```

* Try out these examples and record the results
```
def what fullstring = fullstring| roll | roll | roll| exch |  roll
def fb fullstring = fullstring | roll |roll | roll
def fc fullstring = fullstring | roll | exch |fb
def fd fullstring = fullstring | exch | fc | exch
```

* This examples convert the string "seat" -> "eats"
```
wake -x 'cat((tail (explode "seat")) ++(take 1(explode "seat")))'
```

### Tuple
A tuple is collection of items of different types. `get`,`set` and `edit` are the three inbuilt methods that can be used with the tuples.
* Below example shows the declaration of a tuple. 
```
tuple Collection =

>   global IntValue : Integer

Reviewer: what is the meaning of `global` here? Can I have elements in the `Tuple`  that aren't global?

> A tuple is collection of items of different types. `get`,`set` and `edit` are the three inbuilt methods that can be used with the tuples.
> * Below example shows the declaration of a tuple. 
> ```
> tuple Collection =
>   global IntValue : Integer
>   global DoubleValue : Double
>   global StringValue : String
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A tuple is collection of items of different types. 
* Below example shows the declaration of a tuple. 
```
tuple Collection =
  global IntValue : Integer
  global DoubleValue : Double
  global StringValue : String
```

`get`,`set` and `edit` are the three inbuilt methods that can be used with any Tuple.

```

Author: Done

`set<tuple name><field Name>` 
`set` operation sets(writes) value to the tuple field
`get<tuple name><field Name>` 

> `get` operation gets(reads) value to the tuple field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`get` operation gets(reads) value of the tuple field
```

Author: Done

`edit<tuple name><field Name>` 

> `edit` operation moidfies value to the tuple field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`edit` operation modifies value to the tuple field
```

Author: Done

> 

Reviewer: I feel like i have also seen `add` if the tuple element is a List. Is that a builtin?

Author: No. We can use edit function to do that

> 

Reviewer: can you show some examples of calling those functions on the Tuple you just created? Is a Pair just a special case of a Tuple?

Author: Added.
Pair has 2 fields in it. It can be of same type or different types

## Wake Tutorial

This tutorial will teach you the basics of Wake language. After completeing this tutorial, you will have typed and executed many basic wake functions.

### Invoking wake

1. Create a folder inside `/scratch` directory. `mkdir /scratch/<your_name>/wake_tutorial`.

2. `cd` into the directory. `cd /scratch/<your_name>/wake_tutorial`.

3. Create a wake database: `wake --init .`.After this you will see a `wake.db` file created inside the folder.

4. Create a file with `.wake` extension and copy the functions mentioned in this tutorial and run using `wake` command in the terminal as mentioned in Step 5.  

5. Run command for wake: `wake -vx '<function_name> <parameter_if_any>'`. Ex: `wake -x 'double 2'`.
   
   `v` stands for verbosity and `x` stands for execute the expression.

6. To know about various wake options run `wake --help`. 

7. For more information on wake library click [here](https://sifive.github.io/wake/).

### wake `Hello World`

> * If you want to display a string you can do that using the below function by writing the string to be displayed inside "" and call the function `abc`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

if this is just "hello world" no need to really explain anything. You give plenty of explanation on this later

Author: Done

Copy the below function into a `.wake` file you created in step 4
```
def abc = "Hello World"
```
Then execute the following command 
```
wake -x 'abc'
```
This will call the function `abc` and print `Hello World`.

* You can also do this without a `.wake` file by doing it all in one command: `wake -x '"Hello World"'`

### Defining Functions
A function should be defined using the keyword `def`. Simple function definition takes the form
`def <function name> <parameter list> = <expression>`

> We cannot specify explicitly the return type and type of the parameters. Usually when the function body is of multi-line the return value is specified by the last line in the function.

Reviewer: usually? what is the alternative? Is there a `return` keyword?

Author: There is no `return` keyword

Functions can be defined with the keyword `global` which makes the function to be accessed outside the file where it is being defined.

We can arbitrarily deeply put `def` inside another `def`. The internal `def` is bound to the function itself and cannot be accesible outside the function.

> Note: The only thing you can define functions are using `def` keyword. In wake we deal everything with functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The only thing you can define are functions are using `def` keyword. In wake we do everything with functions.
```

Author: Done

#### Few operators that work on Integer data type
* `+` Addition Operator
* `-` Subtraction Operator
* `*` Multiplication Operator
* `/` Division Operator
* `^` Exponent Operator
* `%` Modulus Operator
* `>>` Right shift Operator
* `<<` Left shift Operator

#### Few operators that work on Double data type
* `+.` Addition Operator
* `-.` Subtraction Operator
* `*.` Multiplication Operator
* `/.` Division Operator
* `^.` Exponent Operator

* Below function  double takes an argment x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 2
```
def double x = 2*x
```

* Below function triple takes an argument x and gives the output by multiplying the x by 3
```
def triple x = 3*x
```

* Function inc increments the values by 1 and returns the value
```
def inc x = x+1
```

* Function adda takes an argument of type string and concatenates it with b and gives the output. `{ }` is the string interpolation operator
```
def adda s = "{s}b"
```

> * Function times4 takes an argument x and applies the function double twice on x

Author: Done

## Wake Tutorial

This tutorial will teach you the basics of Wake language. After completeing this tutorial, you will have typed and executed many basic wake functions.

### Invoking wake

> 1. Create a folder inside `/scratch` directory. `mkdir /scratch/<your_name>/wake_tutorial`.

Reviewer 5: wake is a public open source project

/scratch is not a typical directory that exists on a machine

Try suggesting another directory, like in the users `$HOME` or in `/tmp`

Author: Okay
